So just like with the for-loop, we can
use break and continue to break out of a
while loop, or cause it to stop the current
iteration and test the condition again.
Now in our adventure.py example,
break statement can provide a
simple way to quit, without choosing a
valid exit. We can allow the player to
type quit to exit the game. So let's add some
code to achieve that. I'm going to type
if chosen_exit is equal to quit in
double quotes colon. I'll print a message
to the effect that it's game over, so
print parentheses double quotes
Game over.
Then on the next line, break. Alright so
we'll run the game again now, or program.
We can't really say it's a game at this
stage. Alright so I'm going to enter up
when prompted, as you can see on the
screen. That's not in the list and the
loop goes round again. Down will obviously do
the same. If I now enter quit, we get into
that inner if block, so I'll do that. You
can see we've got Game over and it breaks out of
the while loop, and that causes the last
message also to be printed and the
program terminates. So we probably don't
want that last message, aren't you glad
you got out of here? to appear in this
scenario. I'll show you a way to prevent it
at the end of this section. Before that,
I want to finish this video by making our
code a bit easier to use. We've seen the
casefold function in an earlier video.
It produces a lowercase version of a
string and handles languages that have
multiple versions of the same lowercase
character. This would be a good program
to use it in. First though, let's see the
problem we're trying to solve.
So I'm going to run the program again. This time
we're going to enter quit with a capital Q.
Now other loop goes around again, as you
can see here. Because string comparisons
are case sensitive,
quit with a capital Q doesn't match the
string we're checking for on line six. So
this isn't an ideal experience for the
user. We'll just leave them confused and
frustrated and wondering why quit with a
capital Q doesn't work. To fix the
problem, we can convert chosen underscore
exit to lowercase,
before performing the conversion.
So what I can do is come over here and put a dot
after the chosen underscore exit name on line
six, dot casefold with a left and
right parenthesis, and now when I run the
program again - incidentally if you run a
program when it's already running, then
you'll get this scenario pop up. And this is
popping up because the previous code was
still running and I didn't stop it.
I didn't quit. That's why I'm getting this
dialog, and IntelliJ prevents you from
running the same program while it's
already running, which is probably safest
when learning. So when you see this
dialog, that's what it means. The program
is still running from last time.
So click on stop and rerun to terminate
the previous run and run our latest code.
I'm gonna do that now. The other
alternative is you could have just
clicked on the red stop button, to the
left down the bottom or the top right,
before you ran. That would also fix the
problem, enabling you to run
the program. But I'm gonna stop and rerun.
Now I'm going to enter quit with a
capital Q. This time the code breaks out
of the loop. So break does the same thing
with a while loop as it does with for -
breaks out of the loop it appears in,
causing execution to continue with the
next line of code, after the loop. So in
our example, that's line ten. We'll see
another example of using break with a
while loop in the next couple of videos.
We're going to make our guessing game a
bit more interesting.
See you in the next video.